# MDL (a Z80 assembler optimizer)
Santiago Ontañón (Brain Games)

I spend an enourmous amount of time optimizing the Z80 assembler code of my games to make them fit within small 32KB or 48KB cartridges, and to make them run fast enough. So, I thought I'd try to write a tool that automatically does some of the optimizations that I do manually. I named MDL after the "minimum description length" principle since, in a way, the goal of MDL is to reach the minimum description length representation of a program (although it currently only does **very** simple optimizations).

MDL (Minimum Description Length), is a command line tool to optimize Z80 assembler code. It is distributed as a Java JAR file, and from the command line, you can launch it like this:

```
java -jar mdl.jar
```

Moreover, mdl accepts a number of command line arguments in order to make it do what you want

## Command Line Arguments

```java -jar mdl.jar <input assembler file> [options]```

  ```-cpu <type>```: to select a different CPU (z80/z80msx/z80cpc) (default: z80msx).

  ```-dialect <type>```: to allow parsing different assembler dialects (mdl/glass/asmsx) (default: mdl, which supports some basic code idioms common to various assemblers).
                   Note that even when selecting a dialect, not all syntax of a given assembler might be supported.

  ```-I <folder>```: adds a folder to the include search path.

  ```-warn-off-labelnocolon```: turns off warnings for not placing colons after labels.

  ```-warn-off-jp(rr)```: turns off warnings for using confusing 'jp (hl)' instead of 'jp hl' (this is turned off by default in dialects that do not support this).

  ```-quiet```: turns off info messages; only outputs warnings and errors.

  ```-debug```: turns on debug messages.

  ```-trace```: turns on trace messages.

  ```-hex#```: hex numbers render like #ffff (default).

  ```-HEX#```: hex numbers render like  #FFFF.

  ```-hexh```: hex numbers render like  0ffffh.

  ```-HEXH```: hex numbers render like  0FFFFh.

  ```-+bin```: includes binary files (incbin) in the output analyses.

  ```-no-opt-pragma <value>```: changes the pragma to be inserted in a comment on a line to prevent optimizing it (default: mdl:no-opt)

  ```-po```: Runs the pattern-based optimizer.

  ```-posilent```: Supresses the pattern-based-optimizer output

  ```-popotential```: Reports lines where a potential optimization was not applied for safety, but could maybe be done manually.

  ```--popatterns <file>```: specifies the file to load optimization patterns from (default 'data/pbo-patterns.txt')

  ```-dot <output file>```: generates a dot file with a graph representing the whole source code. Convert it to a png using 'dot' like this: dot -Tpng <output file>.dot -o <output file>.png

  ```-st <output file>```: to output the symbol table.

  ```-st-constants```: includes constants, in addition to labels, in the output symbol table.

  ```-sft <output file>```: generates a tsv file with some statistics about the source files.

  ```-asm <output file>```: saves the resulting assembler code in a single asm file (if no optimizations are performed, then this will just output the same code read as input (but with all macros and include statements expanded).

  ```-asm-expand-inbcin```: replaces all incbin commands with their actual data in the output assembler file, effectively, making the output assembler file self-contained.

  ```-asm+ <output file>```: generates a single text file containing the original assembler code (with macros expanded), that includes size and time annotations at the beginning of each file to help with manual optimizations beyond what MDL already provides.

  ```-a <output file>```: generates an 'annotations' file containing filename/linenumber tagged messags generated by the optimizer. This is supposed to be used to be loaded by text editor and provide in-editor optimization hints.

## How to use MDL

### Optimizing Assembler

The most common use case of MDL is if you have a Z80 assembler project (with main file ```main.asm```), and you just want to optimize it. In this case, you can just do this:

```
java -jar mdl.jar main.asm -po -asm main-optimized.asm
```

The first parameter specifies the input assembler file. ```-po``` tells MDL to run the "pattern-based optimizer", and ```-asm``` specifies the output file to where you want to save the optimized assembler code.

MDL's optimizer doesn't know anything about macros, include statements, and other fancy syntax that is usually included in assembler files. So, MDL's pre-processor loads the assembler files, and runs a pre-processor to resolve all macros before running the optimizer. Thus, the generated code will not contain any macros, as those will all be expanded. Therefore, if you call MDL without ```-po``` it will not run the optimizer, it will just spit out the same assembler code it loaded as input (but with all the macros expanded).

If you just want to run the optimizer, tell you the potential optimizations but not save any optimized code, you can just call MDL like this:

```
java -jar mdl.jar main.asm -po
```

This will just output to the terminal all the suggested optimizations, and you can choose which ones to do manually.


### Other MDL Functionalities

MDL includes several other functionalities, aimed at helping optimizing Z80 assembler code. For example, it can generate "annotated assembler" to help you see how much space each assembler statement uses and make decisions about how to optimize. You can generate this annotated assembler output by calling MDL like this:

```
java -jar mdl.jar main.asm -asm+ main-annotated.txt
```

Of course you could also add a ```-po``` there, if you want to optimize the code before annotating it.

MDL can also generate tables with how much space each of your assembler files uses (if you include many files from a main assembler file, MDL will analyze all of them), and can even generate a little visual reprsentation of your code (saved as a standard .dot file that can then be turned into a pdf or png image to view it using the [dot](https://graphviz.org) tool).


## Requirements

- MDL is a command line tool, so you need access to a terminal

- Java version 8 installed in your computer
